Trisha Paytas is everything you’d expect on Zoom – charming, irresistibly bubbly, and an absolute riot, even while heavily pregnant with her second child (she was actually due earlier in the week). Trish – as she refers to herself – has a knack for turning everything she touches into pop-cultural gold that gets endlessly reshared and recut. With 1.1 million followers on Instagram, 5.13 million subscribers on YouTube, and 9.4 million followers on TikTok, she’s a digital dynamo. But what exactly does Trish do? “I started as a reality TV star, then I became a musician, a mukbanger, a lifestyle blogger, and now a podcast host,” she shares with Vogue. “I basically see what’s trending and find a way to make it work for me.”

Her origins are shrouded in online lore – Can she really speed talk, and did it warrant trying for a Guinness World Record? How bad was her tanning addiction? Is she trolling us or does she really want to be a singer? – but Trish has carved out a cross-platform niche without ever needing to explain herself. Her covers of songs like “Shallow” from A Star is Born (6.1 million views) and “Burn” from Hamilton (1 million views), along with her original tracks like “I Love You Jesus” (9.4 million views) and “Freaky” (7.6 million views), have cemented her as a phenomenon. These originals, in particular, boast high-production sets and costumes crafted specifically for her (she spends a lot on these... but more on that later).
ADVERTISING



Never Miss a <i>Vogue</i> Moment <br> Introductory Offer: Unlimited digital access for <del>£2</del> £1/Month <br> CTA: GET DIGITAL ACCESS
Trish’s cosplay looks, replicating some of pop culture’s most iconic moments, have garnered millions of likes and comments. She’s shared content featuring herself in outfits inspired by Uma Thurman in Kill Bill, Lily-Rose Depp in The Idol, Zac Efron in High School Musical, and Britney Spears in “I’m a Slave 4 U”. Her latest coup? A recreation of Kim Kardashian’s Maison Margiela Artisanal look for this year’s Met Gala, which caused quite a stir – even though the outfit was made entirely by Fashion Nova. That’s before mentioning the internet conspiracy theories that her first-born daughter is the reincarnation of Queen Elizabeth II (she was born shortly after the late Queen passed).